GEP-0066: Make Shoot Domains Mutable (#67)
gardener/enhancements: geps/0066-make-shoot-domains-mutable/README.md

Reviewer: Can you describe how the process would look like for self-hosted shoots exposed via `SelfHostedShootExposure` (see https://github.com/gardener/enhancements/tree/main/geps/0036-self-hosted-shoot-exposure)? There is no internal domain, but shoots might have an external domain. cc @jamand @timebertt

Reviewer 2: I would assume the process for changing the external domain of a self-hosted shoot is the same as for a hosted shoot. As the DNS record is always created "in front of" the control plane address or `SelfHostedShootExposure`, we can change the DNS record just as for hosted shoots. 
Do you have something in mind that wouldn't work in this scenario?

Some Gardener setups don't grant users access to the Shoot API, but offer a different ("proxy") API (e.g., STACKIT Kubernetes Engine). In those setups, the environment has full control over the external domain. As it is not configurable by the shoot owners, the environment can make sure that the external domain is valid and available. Having an internal domain in such an environment is not strictly necessary, at least not for the sake of robustness and availability.

As the internal domain can currently only be configured down to the seed level, all shoots on a seed share the same internal domain zone. Consequently, if that zone is public, a shoot's internal domain will be publicly exposed, even if the shoot resides in a private network zone.

Providing a way to manage these domains for existing shoots would improve the user experience for all of the described cases. Internal and external domains should be mutable; the internal domain should even be optional in cases where the external domain is sufficient.

### Goals
- Make a Shoot's external domain mutable.

> - Make a Seed's internal domain configuration mutable.

Reviewer 3: I think the `seed.spec.dns.defaults` could also fall into the scope of this GEP as it is source for defaulting of the external domain. It would be nice if you can research if it needs some adaption.

Author: This should only affect the validation. An external domain of a Shoot must either have a custom provider or must match one of the Seed's default domains.

- Make the internal domain optional on the Seed level, for example for Gardener setups where the customer doesn't have access to the Shoot API and therefore can't change the external domain.
- Support a seamless migration of a Shoot's internal and external domain via the CA rotation mechanism.
- Enforce that each Shoot has at least one valid domain.
- Protect the ability to modify a Shoot's domains to prevent undesired/accidental changes.

### Non-Goals
- Allowing Shoots without any valid domain.
- Replacing the DNS extension architecture.

## Proposal

### Modify a Shoot's External Domain
To apply modifications of  a Shoot's internal and external domain, the existing CA rotation mechanism is reused.

**Flow of Operation: Change the External Domain for a Single Shoot**
- An authorized user modifies the field `Shoot.spec.dns.domain` according to their needs **AND** adds the annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=rotate-ca-start` to trigger the migration.
- The two-phase CA rotation is started.

> - In the `PREPARING` phase, the DNS records for new domain names are created and appended to the server certificates, while the old domain names are still kept in place to allow a seamless transition. The new internal domain is written to `Shoot.status.advertisedAddresses` with the name `internal`; the old internal domain is added to `Shoot.status.advertisedAddresses` with the name `obsolete-internal`. So both the new and the old internal domain are recorded as in use. If the Shoot uses the default ServiceAccount token issuer — which is derived from the internal domain — the new issuer becomes the primary one (used to mint new tokens), and the old issuer is added to the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers`, so tokens already issued with the old `iss` claim remain valid during the transition.

Reviewer 3: > The new internal domain is written ...

I guess it should be the new external domain?

- When the `PREPARED` phase is reached, the cluster is available through its new domain names. Users need to ensure that they use the new domain and the credentials to access the cluster from now on.

> - In the `COMPLETING` phase, the obsolete DNS records are deleted and the corresponding domains are removed from the server certificates. The obsolete internal domain is removed from `Shoot.status.advertisedAddresses`, leaving only the new one. Likewise, the old issuer is removed from the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers` (see `PREPARING`). Note that bound/projected tokens refresh automatically, but tokens acquired through the token request API will be invalid after the migration. Users must take care of renewing those tokens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- In the `COMPLETING` phase, the obsolete DNS records are deleted and the corresponding domains are removed from the server certificates. The obsolete external domain is removed from `Shoot.status.advertisedAddresses`, leaving only the new one. Likewise, the old issuer is removed from the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers` (see `PREPARING`). Note that bound/projected tokens refresh automatically, but tokens acquired through the token request API will be invalid after the migration. Users must take care of renewing those tokens.
```

# GEP-0066: Make Shoot Domains Mutable

## Summary
This GEP proposes to provide a mechanism to make both the internal and external domains of a Shoot mutable. In certain environments, the internal domain can even be removed completely. The migration process after changing, adding, or removing a domain is carried out as part of a CA rotation.

## Motivation

> Every Gardener environment requires at least one DNS zone for managing "internal domains" of shoots. The internal domain is especially useful, when shoot owners can configure their own "external domain"/provider/zone for their shoot API servers (i.e., via Shoot.spec.dns). It is used for all cluster-critical communication (e.g., kubelet/gardener-node-agent to API server) to ensure robustness and prevent disruptions caused by user configurations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every Gardener environment requires at least one DNS zone for managing "internal domains" of shoots. The internal domain is especially useful, when shoot owners can configure their own "external domain"/provider/zone for their shoot API servers (i.e., via Shoot.spec.dns). The internal domain is used for all cluster-critical communication (e.g., kubelet/gardener-node-agent to API server) to ensure robustness and prevent disruptions caused by user misconfigurations.
```

Currently, an existing shoot's internal domain cannot be changed. Although, in real life, there are several cases, where domain names need to be changed also for existing shoots, for example because of a wrong configuration in the first place, or due to compliance reasons.

Some Gardener setups don't grant users access to the Shoot API, but offer a different ("proxy") API (e.g., STACKIT Kubernetes Engine). In those setups, the environment has full control over the external domain. As it is not configurable by the shoot owners, the environment can make sure, that the external domain is valid and available. Having an internal domain in such an environment is not strictly necessary, at least not in behalf of robustness and availability.

As the internal domain can currently only be configured down to the seed level, all shoots on a seed share the same internal domain zone. Consequently, if that zone is public, a shoot's internal domain will be publicly exposed, even if the shoot resides in a private network zone.

> A native way to manage these domains would improve the user experience for all of the described cases. Internal and external domains should be mutable, the internal domain should even be optional in cases, where the external domain is sufficient.

Reviewer 3: What does native mean in this context? And what are the the difficulties the users are experiencing that will be improved?

### Goals

> - Support changing both the internal and external domain of existing Shoots.

Author: Changing the DNS provider is not suppored and out of scope for this GEP. I mentioned it as a possible "future improvement".

> - Make the internal domain optional, for example for gardener setups where the customer doesn't have access to the Shoot API and therefore can't change the DNS

Reviewer 3: As far as I know, the external domain is optional today, while internal domain is more or less required. Looks like this does not work for you, probably because the internal domain is controlled on seed (previously garden) level. Can you confirm that using only internal domain does not work for you?

Author: As written above, the internal domain can currently only be configured down to seed level, all shoots on one seed share the same internal domain. As we have shoots from different customers on the same seed, we need a way to configure the internal domain more fine-grained per shoot or even remove it for some shoots on a seed.

- Enforce that each Shoot has at least one valid domain.
- Protect the ability to modify any domain to prevent undesired/accidental changes.

> - Support a seamless migration of domains via the CA rotation mechanism.

Reviewer 3: Is it only the CA that is affected by the external domain change? Gardener is creating ingress DNS records  for domain computed out of the external domain, see https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/eda5c0fe3f38d4aa544341efd27b0c3516004143/pkg/gardenlet/controller/shoot/shoot/reconciler_reconcile.go#L984-L986

Reviewer 3: I am starting to think is it good idea to bind the internal/external domain change to the CA rotation operation. Considering the domains are not only used to configure TLS certs, probably a dedicated operation better handling the domain change case should be implemented, what do you think?

Reviewer: The motivation to use CA rotation is because you have to exchange your kubeconfigs when you change the domain. This is also true when you rotate the CAs. Hence, why not just combine both at the same time? The action items are the same for the user, but the effect is doubled: You not only have the new domain, you also have just rotated the CAs of your cluster.

Reviewer 2: What @rfranzke said, plus the ingress addon is deprecated and will be removed soon. It was always offered on a best-effort basis and switching the ingress domain name in one go shouldn't be an issue for users of the deprecated best-effort addon.

Reviewer 3: I was coming from the fact that domain change may require also service account token signing key rotation, so both CA and SA signing key rotation may need to be triggered.

- Support seed-wide domain migrations.

### Non-Goals
- Allowing Shoots without any valid domain.
- Replacing the DNS extension architecture.

## Proposal

### Migration Mechanism for Single Shoots

> Because the internal and external domains are part of a Shoot's network setup, the existing CA rotation mechanism can be reused for domain migrations.

Reviewer 3: The internal domain is strictly configured on the seed level. Optionally, on the seed level default external domains can be configured. On the shoot level only external domain can be configured. 

The internal domain can be used as service account token issuer, fortunately the CA rotation already ensures nodes are rolled out, though it should be checked and eventually implemented renewal of the tokens projected in the seed and users must be made aware that they have to configure new tokens wherever they have set one. Also, if users have configured OIDC federation based on [Service Account Account Issuer Discovery](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-service-account/#service-account-issuer-discovery) - it must be reconfigured to use the new issuer URL.

---------

To summarize, this feature will require good documentation and extra steps to ensure users are made aware for the implication of the change they are doing.

**Flow of Operation for Single Shoots:**

> - An authorized user modifies the domain configuration in the Shoot spec according to their needs **AND** adds the annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=rotate-ca-start` to trigger the migration.

Reviewer 3: Can you outline how an external domain change would look like in the shoot spec?
Once it is clarified, it would be nice to have an example for internal domain, too.

Reviewer 2: Obviously, this refers to `Shoot.spec.dns.domain`. We can add it to the sentence to clarify

- The two-phase CA rotation is started.
- In the `PREPARING` phase, the DNS records for new domain names are created and appended to the server certificates, while the old domain names are still kept in place to allow a seamless transition. The new internal domain is prepended to `status.internalDomains`, so both the new (first) and the old internal domain are recorded as in use. If the Shoot uses the default ServiceAccount token issuer — which is derived from the internal domain — the new issuer becomes the primary one (used to mint new tokens), and the old issuer is added to the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers`, so tokens already issued with the old `iss` claim remain valid during the transition.

> - When the `PREPARED` phase is reached, the cluster is available through its new domain names. This must be checked, in addition to all the new credentials.

Reviewer 3: > This must be checked, in addition to all the new credentials.

What does this mean, can you elaborate? What credentials are meant here?

> - In the `COMPLETING` phase, the obsolete DNS records are deleted and the corresponding domains are removed from the server certificates. The obsolete internal domain is removed from `status.internalDomains`, leaving only the new one. Likewise, the old issuer is removed from the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers` (see `PREPARING`). Note that bound/projected tokens refresh automatically, but legacy long-lived secret-based tokens carrying the old issuer would then be invalidated.

Reviewer 3: > but legacy long-lived secret-based tokens carrying the old issuer would then be invalidated

Are you sure these tokens are bound to the issuer? 
I just created one in a test cluster and has the following claims
```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "kid": "Q1veVSVJJxofPOzVSpwekyCGMKQYu8ivoHAdPoJa_78"
}
{
  "iss": "kubernetes/serviceaccount",
  "kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/namespace": "default",
  "kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/secret.name": "secret-sa-sample",
  "kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-account.name": "default",
  "kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/service-account.uid": "1bb45a60-7460-47c2-b6f3-c50ec9d05936",
  "sub": "system:serviceaccount:default:default"
}
```

Creating a token via the Token API in the same cluster is setting completely different issuer (`iss`) claim 

```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "kid": "Q1veVSVJJxofPOzVSpwekyCGMKQYu8ivoHAdPoJa_78"
}
{
  "aud": [
    "https://kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local"
  ],
  "exp": 1786378398,
  "iat": 1786374798,
  "iss": "https://kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local",
  "jti": "a57d55b5-b404-4917-a069-36395cd494a9",
  "kubernetes.io": {
    "namespace": "default",
    "serviceaccount": {
      "name": "default",
      "uid": "1bb45a60-7460-47c2-b6f3-c50ec9d05936"
    }
  },
  "nbf": 1786374798,
  "sub": "system:serviceaccount:default:default",
  "iatStr": "2026-08-10T15:13:18Z",
  "expStr": "2026-08-10T16:13:18Z",
  "nbfStr": "2026-08-10T15:13:18Z"
}
```

I guess the legacy tokens are irrelevant to the domain change.

Reviewer 2: Good catch, legacy tokens are irrelevant. Project tokens refresh automatically due to the worker node rollout. Tokens created via the `TokenRequest` API (e.g., `kubectl create token`) need to be refreshed manually, but only if the managed or non-default issuer are used.

> - In the `COMPLETING` phase, the obsolete DNS records are deleted and the corresponding domains are removed from the server certificates. The obsolete internal domain is removed from `status.internalDomains`, leaving only the new one. Likewise, the old issuer is removed from the kube-apiserver's `serviceAccountConfig.acceptedIssuers` (see `PREPARING`). Note that bound/projected tokens refresh automatically, but legacy long-lived secret-based tokens carrying the old issuer would then be invalidated.

Reviewer: Do we need `.status.internalDomains` when there is only one? Maybe we can only write this during the migration so that we don't bloat ETCD with unnecessary data?

Adding the triggering annotation in the same step as the actual domain modifications is mandatory.

> To make the internal domain optional, introduce the flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` in the Shoot API. It indicates, if the internal domain is actually needed for the Shoot. The flag is `true` by default (or if absent).

Reviewer 3: This proposal just allows to disable usage of the internal domain, but how can one change it?

Reviewer 2: Changing the internal domain is possible via the Seed spec, see the next section.

> To make the internal domain optional, introduce the flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` in the Shoot API. It indicates, if the internal domain is actually needed for the Shoot. The flag is `true` by default (or if absent).

Reviewer 4: > I think the document already talked about a custom RBAC verb that would be required to use this

Not clearly, at the moment it says:

> a new custom RBAC verb named modify-spec-domain is introduced, which protects the Shoot.spec.dns.domain

I'm fine if the verb is supposed to protect the field but the document should clarify this.

> The Seed API would be a place to disable the internal domain entirely for all shoots on this seed.

Indeed! I'm wondering if it's even a use case to disable internal domains individually.

> If the internal domain is disabled for a Shoot, its external domain is used in all places where the internal domain was used before, instead.

Reviewer 3: Gardener is using SNI and exposes all shoot API servers via the same LoadBalancer/IP, the hostname is used by the ingress controller (Istio) for routing, how does changing a domain being internal or external would affect the request routing in the seed?

Reviewer 2: Maybe I don't really understand your question, but the request routing in the seed is independent of the internal or external nature of the domain, both types are handled similarly by Istio.

Reviewer 3: So it is not expected this GEP to affect how Istio is used and its configurations, it is not envisioned any new development in the kube-apiserver exposing area related to this GEP?

### Migration Mechanism for Entire Seeds
For cases where all Shoots on a Seed are affected (for example because of compliance requirements), introduce a way to provide the changed domain configuration through the Seed spec.

Since the CA rotation is a process that must be executed in a planned manner, adding the changed information to the Seed spec must not automatically trigger the CA rotation for the affected Shoots.

> **Flow of Operation for Entire Seeds:**

Reviewer 3: How is the external domain handled?

Reviewer 2: It cannot be changed at the seed level. Instead, all shoots need to be updated individually to use the new domain in `Shoot.spec.dns.domain`.

> - The operator modifies the list of valid internal domains in the Seed spec according to their needs **AND** notifies all Shoot owners that they should trigger a CA rotation.

Reviewer 3: > notifies all Shoot owners that they should trigger a CA rotation

Is this done by Gardener or the operator is expected to do it via separate channel, e.g. mail, ticket, call, etc?

Reviewer: I guess the latter. We could think about writing a constraint into the `Shoot` status in addition?

Reviewer 2: Good idea, we can add a constraint if the shoot does not use the operator-preferred internal domain from the seed spec yet.

- Whenever a CA rotation is triggered for a specific Shoot on this Seed, the internal domain of this Shoot is migrated to the first entry in the Seed's list of valid internal domains.

Therefore the Seed API is extended to provide a list of internal domains instead of a single value. The first entry in this list is the one that must be applied to newly created shoots or shoots undergoing a CA rotation, while the other entries are also valid. This pattern is already used in other places.

> Disabling the internal domains of all Shoots on a Seed is out of scope, this can only be done through the Shoot API.

Reviewer: Why? Isn't this the very same process that you described above when it comes to changing the internal domain?

Author: This sentence is obsolete.. Disabling for all shoots on one seed should be possible.

### Securing Control Over the Domain Configuration

> Only operators must be able to modify the domain configuration of a Shoot. Therefore, a new custom RBAC verb named `modify-spec-domains` is introduced, which protects the fields related to the domains, similar to the `modify-spec-tolerations-whitelist` and `mark-self-hosted` verbs provided through the  [`CustomVerbAuthorizer`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/0025fc1765c6fdb9106249bb1754108acedb4362/docs/concepts/apiserver-admission-plugins.md#customverbauthorizer).

Reviewer: Do you mean that only operators may change the `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` field that you propose in the `ShootSpec`? If so, I agree. However, the fields related to the external domain in `.spec.dns` should remain changeable just like today. Do you agree?

Author: This is obsolete. Since the internal domain is configured in the Seed spec, there is no reason to protect anything related in the Shoot spec.

| The domain configuration is inconsistent or invalid. | Low | High | The validation enforces that each Shoot has at least one valid domain. The CA rotation is only triggered, if the domain configuration is consistent and valid. |
| Any user that has access to the Shoot resource can modify a cluster's internal or external domain. | Mid | High | A new custom RBAC verb is introduced, which is only granted to the `gardener.cloud:admin` role. The verb is checked every time a modification of the domain configuration in a Shoot spec is detected. Unauthorized modifications are rejected. |
| An operator removes an internal domain from a Seed that is still in use by Shoots. | Low | High | Seed admission rejects removing an internal domain that any Shoot on the Seed still records in `status.internalDomains`. |

## Design Details

### API Changes
- **Shoot Spec**: Add the configuration flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` to enable/disable the internal domain.

> - **Shoot Status**: Add `status.internalDomains`, the list of internal (base) domains currently in use by the Shoot, maintained by gardenlet during reconciliation. Under normal operation it holds a single entry; during a domain migration it holds both the new and the old internal domain, with the new (primary) domain as the **first** entry. This field lets the Seed admission determine which internal domains are still in use.

Reviewer 3: There is `shoot.status.advertisedAddresses` field where `internal` addresses can be recorded. For DNS domain, is it necessary to retain the credentials, zones, and other domain configs? If not, probably it is better to re-use `advertisedAddresses`.

Reviewer: I also thought about that approach. I guess it's a viable option compared to introducing a new field that captures more or less the same information. What are your thoughts @ftl?

Author: That's a good idea, but requires a distinct name for the "old" internal domain. At least during the migration, we need the old and new internal domain.

> - **Seed Spec**: Replace the single value for the internal domain with a list of multiple internal domains, designating the first entry as the primary value. The primary value is used for newly created Shoots and whenever a CA rotation of an existing Shoot allows to migrate the Shoot's internal domain.

Reviewer 3: > The primary value is used ... whenever a CA rotation of an existing Shoot allows to migrate the Shoot's internal domain.

This makes the change implicit, the shoot owner/users must be informed for the change in someway, they cannot wild-guess whether CA rotation will change their internal domain.

Reviewer: I guess this was mentioned above (L53) - users have to be informed that this will happen. Or do you mean something else?

- **Admission**: Add the custom `modify-spec-domains` RBAC verb.

### Extension of the CA Rotation Mechanism
- **Phase 1 (Prepare)**: Deploy both old and new `DNSRecord` resources. Update APIServer SANs to include both. Issue new kubeconfigs with the new domain.

> - **Phase 2 (Complete)**: Clean up the old `DNSRecord` resources and remove the old domain from the SANs. 

Reviewer 3: Will it be allowed to change the domain between phase 1 and 2, I guess no?

Reviewer: No, this should be forbidden. Good point. This needs to be validated.

What happens when the `SeedSpec` adds a new internal domain while `Shoot`s are in `Prepared` phase? Probably nothing, but maybe worth mentioning?

Author: The new internal domain will be used in the next rotation.

If applicable, the ServiceAccount token issuer configuration must be updated as described in [Migration Mechanism for Single Shoots](#migration-mechanism-for-single-shoots).

### Extension of the Admission Mechanism

> - implement or extend a admission plugin that checks the new RBAC verb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- implement or extend an admission plugin that checks the new RBAC verb
```

I guess rather extend, right? We already have the custom RBAC authorizer plugin.

> - the `ShootDNS` admission plugin might be a good fit

Reviewer: For the RBAC check, I guess the custom RBAC authorizer plugin is better.

### Validation
- ensure a Shoot has at least one valid domain (either internal or external)
- enforce that domain changes only occur in the same API request that prepares a CA rotation
- reject removing an internal domain from a Seed's list while it is still in use, i.e. while any Shoot scheduled on that Seed still lists it in `status.internalDomains`. This mirrors the existing `ValidateDefaultDomainsChangeForSeed` check for default (external) domains in the Seed validator admission plugin and concerns also the checks in `ValidateInternalDomainChangeForSeed`.
- the `ShootDNS` admission plugin might be a good fit

## Drawbacks
- increases the complexity of the reconciliation logic in Botanist

> - tight coupling between DNS management and CA rotation

Reviewer: Why do you mention this as drawback? Isn't this rather a benefit that motivated us to couple both (see above)?

## Alternatives

### Options for Authorizing Shoot Domain Changes

This GEP proposes to introduce a new RBAC verb to protect domain configuration from modifications by the owners. Here are valid alternatives:

1. **No Dedicated Restriction**: Rely solely on the mandatory simultaneous CA rotation as the guard, and let anyone with permission to update the Shoot change the domains.
2. **Global Configuration**: Use a global configuration option instead of a permission to allow/disallow the modification of the domain configuration on the shoot level in the entire Gardener installation.

### Disable the Internal Domain per Seed (Without Domain Mutability)

A narrower variant of this GEP's idea would be to supports only **enabling/disabling the internal domain at the Seed level** and to drop domain mutability entirely — neither the internal nor the external domain of a Shoot can be changed. This covers the motivating use case (proxy-API setups such as STACKIT Kubernetes Engine, where the environment fully controls the external domain and the internal domain is not needed) without introducing mutable domains.

> There is no per-Shoot internal-domain concept today. The internal domain is configured landscape-wide (a single `internal-domain` secret in the garden namespace) with an optional per-Seed override (`Seed.spec.dns.internal`); the finest existing granularity is per-Seed. The motivating use case is scoped to a whole environment/Seed anyway, and `Seed` resources are already restricted to operators, so no custom RBAC verb is required.

Reviewer 3: The internal domain configuration via secret should be deprecated, at least this is my understanding of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/12596. Similarly, default domains configuration via secret should be deprecated as part of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/12803

Reviewer: Yes, we should not support this here - only the `SeedSpec` should be relevant.

Author: see also https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/15497

A native way to manage these domains, including migrations, is required. The internal domain should be optional.

### Goals
- Support changing both the internal and external domain of existing Shoots.
- Make the internal domain optional, for example for gardener setups where the customer doesn't have access to the Shoot API and therefore can't change the DNS
- Enforce that each Shoot has at least one valid domain.
- Protect the ability to modify any domain with a new custom RBAC verb.
- Support a seamless migration of domains via the CA rotation mechanism.
- Support seed-wide domain migrations.

### Non-Goals
- Allowing Shoots without any valid domain.
- Replacing the DNS extension architecture.

## Proposal

### Migration Mechanism for Single Shoots
Both the internal and external domain of a Shoot are part of its network communication setup information. Hence it is a natural fit to extend an already existing mechanism for the migration of another part of this information: the CA rotation mechanism.

**Flow of Operation for Single Shoots:**

> - The operator modifies the domain configuration in the Shoot spec according to their needs **AND** adds the annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=rotate-ca-start` to trigger the migration.

Reviewer 2: @vpnachev mentioned that the internal domain might also be used for the ServiceAccount issuer (if not using a custom issuer or the managed issuer). We need to double-check the consequences of this in the context of this GEP.

Author: We could keep the old SA issuer in the AcceptedIssuers during the CA rotation. But would it be safe to remove it from there during the COMPLETING phase?

Author: As soon as the CA rotation is COMPLETE, old tokens must be invalid -> the old SA issuer can be removed from the AcceptedIssuers.

> # GEP-0066: Migration Mechanism for Internal and External Domain Configuration

Reviewer 5: Please align GEP title with filenames and PR title

> # GEP-0066: Migration Mechanism for Internal and External Domain Configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# GEP-0066: Make Shoot Domains Mutable
```

to be consistent with the issue and directory name

## Table of Contents

> [TOC]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Can be removed.

> [TOC]

Reviewer: This is no longer part of the template.

## Summary

> This GEP proposes to provide a mechanism to migrate both the internal and external domains of a single Shoot, or even of all Shoots on a Seed, and to make the internal domain for Shoot clusters optional.

Reviewer 2: In addition to this very concise sentence, I would add that:
- changing/enabling/disabling domains requires a CA rotation
- operators can decide whether the internal domain can be disabled in a given environment

## Motivation

> Every Gardener environment requires a DNS zone used for managing "internal domains" of shoots. The zone can be configured per seed.

Reviewer 6: As there can be multiple seeds with different zones let's rephrase this to

```suggestion
Every Gardener environment requires at least one DNS zone for managing "internal domains" of shoots. The zone can be configured per seed.
```

> The internal domain primarily targets Gardener setups, where shoot owners can configure their own "external domain"/provider/zone for their shoot API servers (i.e., via Shoot.spec.dns). 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The internal domain is especially useful, when shoot owners can configure their own "external domain"/provider/zone for their shoot API servers (i.e., via Shoot.spec.dns). 
```

The internal domain is used for all cluster-critical communication (e.g., kubelet/gardener-node-agent to API server) to ensure robustness and prevent disruptions caused by user configurations.

> Some Gardener setups don't grant users access to the Shoot API but offer a different ("proxy") API (e.g., STACKIT Kubernetes Engine). In those setups, the environment has full control over the external domain, it is not configurable by shoot owners. Having a second fully controlled internal domain does not provide any additional value in regards of robustness or availability. 

Reviewer 6: Actually, having separate domain names for communication of critical components, e.g. kubelet, gardener-node-agent etc, in contrast to standard components can provide a benefit in that it is easier to distinguish traffic, e.g. in the access logs of a reverse proxy (istio). Whether you want to take advantage of that and whether the additional cost in complexity is worth it are on another page.
Still, I think we should rephrase this as it is simply not true.

> Currently, every Shoot receives a Gardener-managed internal domain. This is not always desired (for example with private DNS or shared zones) or necessary (for example with fully controlled external domains), and cannot be changed easily. In other scenarios, it might be necessary to modify the internal or external domains of a single Shoot cluster or even of all Shoots on a Seed, for example due to compliance reasons.

Reviewer 6: Could you please elaborate on the use cases why this is not always desired? The part in parentheses does not help me understand it.

> Currently, every Shoot receives a Gardener-managed internal domain. This is not always desired (for example with private DNS or shared zones) or necessary (for example with fully controlled external domains), and cannot be changed easily. In other scenarios, it might be necessary to modify the internal or external domains of a single Shoot cluster or even of all Shoots on a Seed, for example due to compliance reasons.

Reviewer 6: I have the impression that `cannot be changed easily` is not the way it is today. It is not possible today as far as I remember unless you hack your way through `etcd`. Did I miss something?

Reviewer 5: I guess that is what he meant by "not easily". But you are right, without hacking, it can't be changed.

Reviewer 6: Maybe let's rephrase it then to something along the lines of `cannot be changed via API`.

> Currently, every Shoot receives a Gardener-managed internal domain. This is not always desired (for example with private DNS or shared zones) or necessary (for example with fully controlled external domains), and cannot be changed easily. In other scenarios, it might be necessary to modify the internal or external domains of a single Shoot cluster or even of all Shoots on a Seed, for example due to compliance reasons.

Reviewer 2: Probably, it makes sense to start with this paragraph stating that the domains are not mutable, because the main goals of the enhancement is to change this.

A native way to manage these domains, including migrations, is required. The internal domain should be optional.

### Goals

> - Support changing both the internal and domain of existing Shoots.

Reviewer 6: Probably a word was forgotten.

```suggestion
- Support changing both the internal and external domain of existing Shoots.
```

> - Make the internal domain optional, for example for Shoots with fully controlled external domains.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Make the internal domain optional, for example for gardener setups where the customer doesn't have access to the Shoot API and therefore can't change the DNS
```

Example

> - Enforce that each Shoot has at least one valid domain.

Reviewer 6: What does this mean? Could a shoot cluster have an invalid domain?

Author: I had validation in my mind. A cluster can of course not have an invalid domain. We must enforce this invariant with validation.

> - Protect the ability to modify any domain with a new custom RBAC verb.

Reviewer 6: Why?

Reviewer 2: The idea seems to be: supporting setups where the internal domain can be disabled and also ones that require keeping the internal domain enabled.
Using a custom RBAC verb might be an implementation detail. The goal could also be implemented using a global configuration in the API server that either allows or prohibits disabling the internal domain per shoot.

Reviewer: I think we discussed this briefly in the Hackathon with @timebertt - we thought it could be beneficial to be extra-cautious here (if we just make the domain fields mutable, an undesired, accidental change could/will cause downtimes).

- For external domains, however, we bind a domain change to the simultaneous application of the CA rotation operation annotation, this might not be needed/provide additional benefits anymore.
- For internal domains, this might be beneficial (since users have to self-trigger their CA rotations at a later point in time). This should be more clear here.

- Support a seamless migration of domains via the CA rotation mechanism.
- Support seed-wide domain migrations.

### Non-Goals
- Allowing Shoots without any valid domain.
- Replacing the DNS extension architecture.

## Proposal

### Migration Mechanism for Single Shoots

> Both the internal and external domain of a Shoot are part of its network communication setup information. Hence it is a natural fit to extend an already existing mechanism for the migration of another part of this information: the CA rotation mechanism.

Reviewer 6: These sentences are quite a mouthful, e.g. `network communication setup information`. Maybe we can rephrase them to be easier to read/understand.

> Both the internal and external domain of a Shoot are part of its network communication setup information. Hence it is a natural fit to extend an already existing mechanism for the migration of another part of this information: the CA rotation mechanism.

Reviewer 5: What SheererJ said plus the last sentence can be simplified.

**Flow of Operation for Single Shoots:**

> - The operator modifies the domain configuration in the Shoot spec according to their needs **AND** adds the annotation `gardener.cloud/operation=rotate-ca-start` to trigger the migration.

Reviewer 6: Do we only ever expect an operator to trigger the domain change? Would it not also be possible/reasonable for a cluster owner to trigger it, e.g. if the external domain is configurable?

Reviewer 5: Yes adjust the wording here please. Anyone with access to the i.e. Gardener Dashboard could trigger this

- The two-phase CA rotation is started.

> - In the `PREPARING` phase, the new DNS records created and appended to the server certificates, while the old ones are still kept in place to allow a seamless transition.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- In the `PREPARING` phase, the new DNS records are created and appended to the server certificates, while the old ones are still kept in place to allow a seamless transition.
```

> - In the `COMPLETING` phase, the obsolete DNS records deleted and the corresponding domains are removed from the server certificate.

Reviewer 6: Should the flow not also explicitly state when the domain name is switched, i.e. old one deleted and new one created? I have an idea when it could be, but I would prefer for it to be explicitly stated.

Adding the triggering annotation in the same step as the actual domain modifications is mandatory.

> Make the internal domain optional for cases, where the external domain is fully under the environments control and the internal domain does not provide any additional value. Introduce the flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` in the Shoot API to indicate if the internal domain is actually needed for the Shoot. The flag is `true` by default (or if absent).

Reviewer 6: As mentioned above, there is always a value in having a separate domain. Whether you want to use it or not is a different question. Therefore, I propose to change it as follows:

```suggestion
Make the internal domain optional for cases, where the external domain is fully under the environments control and the internal domain is not desired. Introduce the flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` in the Shoot API to indicate if the internal domain is actually needed for the Shoot. The flag is `true` by default (or if absent).
```

> Make the internal domain optional for cases, where the external domain is fully under the environments control and the internal domain does not provide any additional value. Introduce the flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` in the Shoot API to indicate if the internal domain is actually needed for the Shoot. The flag is `true` by default (or if absent).

Reviewer 2: This might be applied by the description above, but it might be a good idea to state explicitly that disabling the internal domain also requires a CA rotation.

If the internal domain is disabled for a Shoot, its external domain is used instead.

### Migration Mechanism for Whole Seeds
For cases where all Shoots on a Seed are affected (for example because of compliance requirements), introduce a way to provide the change information through the Seed spec. 

Since the CA rotation is a process that must be executed in a planned manner, adding the change information to the Seed spec must not trigger the CA rotation for the affected Shoots.

**Flow of Operation for Whole Seeds:**

> - The operator modifies the list of valid internal domains in the Seed spec according to theri needs **AND** notifies all shoot owners that they should trigger a CA rotation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The operator modifies the list of valid internal domains in the Seed spec according to their needs **AND** notifies all shoot owners that they should trigger a CA rotation.
```

> - Whenever a Shoot CA rotation is triggered, the internal domain of this Shoot is migrated to the first entry in the Seed's list of valid internal domains (or removed, if the internal domain disabled for this Shoot).

Reviewer 6: Sorry, but I do not fully understand the flow. Please explain it in more detail.
I can envision two easy scenarios:
1. As operator, I want to change the internal domain of shoots hosted on my seed.
2. As operator, I want to get rid of all internal domains of shoots hosted on my seed.

The flow is fuzzy for both of them. Please clarify.

Reviewer: Isn't the flow the same? In both cases, the `Seed` spec has to be changed (either new domain added at index `0`, or `enabled=false`). Then users have to rotate CAs for their `Shoot`s.

My question would rather be, since it's not mentioned: We should enforce that the existing internal domain specification cannot be removed from the `Seed` spec as long as there are still `Shoot`s using them. Then again: How will `gardener-apiserver` track/identify this (to implement the validation)?

Reviewer 5: - The 2nd case will be explicitly not supported. (turn off all)

### Securing Control Over the Domain Configuration

> Only users with the role `gardener.cloud:admin` must be able to modify the domain configuration of a Shoot or a Seed. Therefor a new custom RBAC verb named `modify-spec-domains` is introduced, similar to the [`modify-spec-tolerations-whitelist`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/0025fc1765c6fdb9106249bb1754108acedb4362/docs/concepts/apiserver-admission-plugins.md#customverbauthorizer).

Reviewer 6: Why are cluster owners not allowed to change the domain configuration? It probably makes sense to expand this section to clarify.

Reviewer: I agree - for `Shoot`s, cluster owners should be able (w/o additional RBAC, but w/ enforce of simultaneous CA rotation) to modify their domain.

Author: So, would a simple configuration setting that generally allows/disallows removing the internal domain instead of the new RBAC verb be viable solution?

> Only users with the role `gardener.cloud:admin` must be able to modify the domain configuration of a Shoot or a Seed. Therefor a new custom RBAC verb named `modify-spec-domains` is introduced, similar to the [`modify-spec-tolerations-whitelist`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/0025fc1765c6fdb9106249bb1754108acedb4362/docs/concepts/apiserver-admission-plugins.md#customverbauthorizer).

Reviewer 6: Is the new RBAC verb only meant for the `Shoot` changes or also the `Seed`? Do we need it for the `Seed` as those are anyway only changeable by operators?

Reviewer: I guess we should only do this for `Seed`s (see above).

> Only users with the role `gardener.cloud:admin` must be able to modify the domain configuration of a Shoot or a Seed. Therefor a new custom RBAC verb named `modify-spec-domains` is introduced, similar to the [`modify-spec-tolerations-whitelist`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/0025fc1765c6fdb9106249bb1754108acedb4362/docs/concepts/apiserver-admission-plugins.md#customverbauthorizer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only users with the role `gardener.cloud:admin` must be able to modify the domain configuration of a Shoot or a Seed. Therefore, a new custom RBAC verb named `modify-spec-domains` is introduced, similar to the [`modify-spec-tolerations-whitelist`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/0025fc1765c6fdb9106249bb1754108acedb4362/docs/concepts/apiserver-admission-plugins.md#customverbauthorizer).
```

### Risks and Mitigations

| Risk | Likelihood | Impact | Mitigation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | Worker nodes are unavilable due to broken network name resolution. | Low | High | The old DNS records and certificate SANs are kept during the first phase of the CA rotation ("prepare"). Only when all worker nodes are rolled and available under the new domain configuration, the obsolete DNS records and certificate SANs are removed. |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| Worker nodes are unavilable due to broken domain name resolution. | Low | High | The old DNS records and certificate SANs are kept during the first phase of the CA rotation ("prepare"). Only when all worker nodes are rolled and available under the new domain configuration, the obsolete DNS records and certificate SANs are removed. |
```

| The domain configuration is inconsistent or invalid. | Low | High | The validation enforces that each Shoot has at least one valid domain. The CA rotation is only triggered, if the domain configuration is consitent and valid. |

> | Any user that has access to the Shoot or Seed CRD can modify a cluster's internal or external domain. | Mid | High | A new custom RBAC verb is introduced, which is only granted to the `gardener.cloud:admin` role. The verb is checked every time a modification of the domain configuration in a Shoot or Seed spec is detected. Unauthorized modifications are rejected. |

Reviewer 6: I had the assumption that the domain name change also required the CA rotation annotation. Hence, accidental changes should also be prevented by admission control. Did I get it wrong?

## Design Details

### API Changes

> - **Shoot Spec**: Add the configuration flag `spec.dns.internalDomain.enabled` to enable/disable the internal domain.

Reviewer: Wait a sec, I got confused now: Why do we need this on `Shoot` level? I thought: Either I want all `Shoot`s on a `Seed` to have an internal domain (then I set `internalDomain.enabled=true` in the `Seed` spec), or none (then `internalDomain.enabled=false` in the `Seed` spec). Whatever is set, the change is applied via the next CA rotation. Why do we need this field here?

Reviewer 2: In the hackathon and the discussions based on that, we only considered disabling the internal domain for individual shoots in the shoot spec. However, disabling it in all shoots via the `Seed` API would also fulfill our requirements (we want to get rid of the internal domain eventually anyway). When pursuing this approach, the implementation becomes even simpler, and we don't need any custom RBAC verbs, etc. In that case, we only need to figure out a good API design for the Seed API changes.

> - **Seed Spec**: Replace the single value for the internal domain with a list of multiple internal domains, designating the first entry as the primary value. The primary value is used for newly created Shoots and whenever a CA rotation of an existing Shoot allows to migrate the Shoot's internal domain.

Reviewer: How do you plan to do this in an API-compatible way? Pls provide examples here.

Author: The old field "internalDomain" will still be available and automatically synced with the "internalDomains" field.

> - **Admission**: Add the custom `modify-spec-domains` RBAC verb.

Reviewer: For `Seed` API

### Extension of the CA Rotation Mechanism
- **Phase 1 (Prepare)**: Deploy both old and new `DNSRecord` resources. Update APIServer SANs to include both. Issue new kubeconfigs with the new domain.
- **Phase 2 (Complete)**: Cleanup old `DNSRecord` resources and remove the old domain from SANs.

### Extension of the Admission Mechanism
- implement or extend a admission plugin that checks the new RBAC verb
- the `ShootDNS` admission plugin might be a good fit

### Validation
- ensure a Shoot has at least one valid domain (either internal or external)

> - enforce that domain changes only occur during a CA rotation

Reviewer 2: "during" might not be the best wording. What about the following?
```suggestion
- enforce that domain changes only occur in the same API request that prepares a CA rotation
```

- the `ShootDNS` admission plugin might be a good fit

## Drawbacks
- increases the complexity of the reconciliation logic in Botanist
- tight coupling between DNS management and CA rotation

## Alternatives
- **Manual Migration**: High risk of downtime and configuration errors.

> - **Separate Rotation Resource**: Over-complicates the user experience compared to extending the already existing CA rotation mechanism.

Reviewer 6: Would it not also be an option to trigger a credential rotation automatically when a domain name is changed? As far as I understand the proposal you have to do two things at once and get an error if you only change the domain name. However, a domain name change could also imply a CA rotation trigger, which is a possible alternative. It might make sense to list it and share a reason why we do not take this approach.

Reviewer: Maybe not, because credentials rotation can also have impact beyond the DNS changes, and we probably want users to be very clear about this. Hence, letting them do this explicitly (when they want to change their domain names) is probably better (this also prevents accidental/unintended domain changes).
